[Documentation] a11y Markup Checklist (#558)
massgov/mayflower: patternlab/docs/a11y-checklist/buttons.md

[⬅️ a11y Checklist](a11y-checklist.md)

# Buttons `<button>`

## 📖 Definition

> **Buttons** (that have type="button") are not submit buttons. **Buttons** are used to *create features that rely on Javascript*. Behaviors such as revealing a menu or showing a date picker.

Reviewer: I'm a little confused here -- I think you're trying to distinguish between `<input "type=button">` and `<button>` -- is that right? Can you say more?

Author: Either a`<button>` or an `<input>` used as a button, need a `type` attribute to specify its role of "button", "reset", or "submit".

**🛑 Set type attribute**

> If your buttons are not to submit form data to a server, be sure to set their type attribute to button. Otherwise they will try to submit form data and to load the (nonexistent) response, possibly destroying the current state of the document.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your button does not submit form data to a server, be sure to set the type attribute to button. Otherwise, it will try to submit form data and to load the (nonexistent) response, possibly destroying the current state of the document.
```

> **🛑 Be careful for a use of a *link* vs. a *button*.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**🛑 Should you use a *link* or a *button*?**
```

**Link** has a *hand cursor*.  **[Button](buttons.md)** has a pointer.
  
Their roles are different. Browsers recognize and implement them *differently* with their unique characters.

---

> ## ➤➤ Does your button’s functionality fit above definition?

Reviewer: What functionality? You mention the cursor difference, but there's no real explanation of what the different elements should be used for. Maybe expand on that a bit more?

Author: This will be added in version 2.

**➣ Yes:** [Move onto the button label. ⬇️](#button-label) 

**➢ No:** Don't use `<button>`. Use `<a>` instead. Check your markup at the [Link section](links.md). ➡️

<a name="button-label"></a>
## Button label

> ### ➤➤ Is the buton label text?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### ➤➤ Is the button label text (that is, not an image)?
```

**➣ Yes:** Text [Go to the following question. ⬇️](#text)

> **➢ No:** Image [Go to the next question. ⬇️](#image)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**➢ No:** Is it an image? [Go to the Image section below. ⬇️](#image)
```

> **➤ Yes/No:** Text + Image [Go to the next question. ⬇️](#text-image)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**➤ Yes/No:** Is it text plus an image? [See the Text + Image section below. ⬇️](#text-image)
```

 
<a name="text"></a>
### Text 

<a name="link-context"></a> 

> #### ➤➤ Is the label text descriptive enough to see what the button does? Is it clear enough to screen reader users?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### ➤➤ Is the text descriptive enough to explain what the button does to screen reader users?
```

**➣ Yes:** [Move on to next element. ➡️](a11y-checklist.md)

**➢ No:**  It’s not descriptive enough: 

> 🤔 "The *label text* of WHAT?" If you don't see the answer of the question in the label text(This sounds funny, but if you see below samples, it should make sense.), context info. is necessary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
🤔 "Does the *label text* answer of/for/about WHAT?" If it doesn't, context info is necessary.
```

##### Case 1: Need supplemental information.

> It makes sense when you can see the entire section, but doesn't when you see just the label itself:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some labels make sense when you can see the entire section, but don't when you see just the label itself. For example:
```

- open/expand
- close
- show more
- show less

> We need to provide the WHAT as context information. Use visually hidden text to add contextual info.
> 
> ###### Examples

> > Expand`<span class=”ma--visually-hidden”>` the Table of Content`</span>`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Expand`<span class=”ma--visually-hidden”>` the Table of Content`</span>`
```
```suggestion
> Expand`<span class=”ma--visually-hidden”>` the Table of Contents`</span>`
```

> 

> > Show more`<span class=”ma--visually-hidden”>` related pages to this page, page title.`</span>`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Show more`<span class=”ma--visually-hidden”>` pages related to this page, [page title].`</span>`
```

##### Case 2: Adding contextual info as visually hidden text doesn't help:

It needs supplemental information, but it doesn't make sense to add it as visually hidden text.

> The label doesn't make sense by itself:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some labels don't make sense by themselves:
```

> - The button label is a symbol. Screen readers announce the symbol.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For example, if the button label is a symbol, screen readers announce the symbol.
```

```
<button 
  type="button"  
  aria-expanded="false" 
  aria-controls="toc-overlay">+</button>
```

> > - Use `aria-label` to override the existing button label. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> - In these cases, use `aria-label` to override the existing button label. 
```

> 

> > - Add any necessary context info to the  `aria-label` as well. With above sample, the label could be "click to show the table of contents". 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> - Add any necessary context info to the  `aria-label` as well. In the example above, the label could be "click to show the table of contents". 
```

> 
> 
> ```
> <button 
>   type="button"  
>   aria-expanded="false"
>   aria-label="click to show the table of contents" 
>   aria-controls="toc-overlay">+</button>
> ```
> 

> > 📋 When `aria-label` is used, screen readers ignore the content between `<button>` and `</button> `and announce `aria-label` value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> 📋 When `aria-label` is used, screen readers ignore the content between `<button>` and `</button> `and announce the `aria-label` value.
```

[Move on to next element. ➡️](a11y-checklist.md)

<a name="image"></a>
### Image

> #### ➤➤ Does the image have `alt` attribute?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### ➤➤ Does the image have an `alt` attribute?
```

**➣ Yes:** [Go to the following question. ⬇️](#alt)

> **➢ No:**  Add `alt` attribute. [Go to the following question. ⬇️](#alt)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**➢ No:**  Add an `alt` attribute. [Go to the following question. ⬇️](#alt)
```

<a name="alt"></a>

> #### ➤➤ Does the `alt` attribute clearly tell what the button does as the button label?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### ➤➤ Does the `alt` attribute work as a button label, and clearly tell what the button does?
```

**➣ Yes:** You are all set. [Move on to next element. ➡️](a11y-checklist.md)

**➢ No:** The value is empty, or isn't descriptive enough. 

**🛑 In this case, `alt` shouldn't be empty.**

> - Add descriptive `alt` value as the button label.
> 
> - Add any necessary context info to `alt` as well.
> 
> 📋 You might need to confirm with the UX or content team what would be proper for the label.

[Move on to next element. ➡️](a11y-checklist.md)

<a name="text-image"></a>
### Text and Image

> #### ➤➤ Do the text and the image both describe the same thing(= they have duplicate information)?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### ➤➤ Do the text and the image both describe the same thing (in other words, do they provide duplicate information)?
```

> **➣ Yes:** Both information is same.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**➣ Yes:** 
```

> > Respect the text over the image. Empty the image’s `alt` value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Respect the text over the image. Make sure the image has an empty `alt` value.
```

> > The image is presented as a decorative purpose.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> In this case, the purpose of the image is decorative.
```

> **🛑 Keep `alt` attribute even its value is empty.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**🛑 Keep `alt` attribute even its value is empty.**
```
```suggestion
**🛑 Keep an `alt` attribute even its value is empty.**
```

```<img src="image.jpg" alt="" />```

> 📋 If `<img>` doesn't have `alt` attribute, screen readers try to provide any other available information for the image and announce `src` value, which is not only not helpful, but also unpleasant to screen reader users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
📋 If an `<img>` doesn't have an `alt` attribute, screen readers try to provide any other available information for the image and announce the `src` value, which is not only not helpful, but actually annoying for screen reader users.
```

When the `alt` value is empty, screen readers know it is *purposely* empty, and don't try to deliver any other information.

[Move on to next element. ➡️](a11y-checklist.md)

**➢ No [Case 1]:** The text and the image provide unique information.

> > - Add `alt` value to provide the information the image delivers. For example, if the image is an icon, what the icon signifies such as "open" or "close".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> - Add an `alt` value to provide the information the image delivers. For example, if the image is an icon, the `alt` value should describe what the icon signifies, such as "open" or "close".
```

> 

> > - As a button label, make sure the flow of *both information together* makes sense to screen reader users:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> - When a button's label contains both text and an image, make sure the flow of *both together* makes sense to screen reader users and flow naturally together:
```

> 		
>    - “Img alt value + label text”, or 
> 	  - “label text + img alt value” 
> 

> > 	flows naturally.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> 
> - If they don't flow well together, 

> >     - add contextual text info as visually hidden text, or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>     - add contextual text info as visually hidden text, like this:
```

> 
>		```
> 		<button type="button">
> 		   <img src="icon.png" alt="Sort" />
> 			<span class="ma--visually-hidden"> by </span>
>  			Dates
> 		</button>
>		```
>

> >		"Sort by dates."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>		This label will now read "Sort by dates."
```

> >     - override them with `aria-label`, empty the `alt` value for cleaner markup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>     - override them with `aria-label` and empty the `alt` value for cleaner markup.
```

> 
>		```
> 		<button type="button" 
>        aria-label="Show the office hours.">
> 		  Office Hours
> 		  <img src="icon_open.png" alt="" />
> 		</button>
>		```
>

> > 		"Show the office hours."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> 		This label will now read: "Show the office hours."
```

>
> 📋 When `aria-label` is used, screen readers ignore the content between `<button>` and `</button>` and announce `aria-label` value.
> 

> > **🛑  When the image indicates the state of what the button triggers, make sure the text information also gets updated as the state changes.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **🛑  When the image describes the state that the button triggers, make sure the text information also gets updated as the state changes.**
```

    
**➢ No [Case 2]:** Text has enough information as the label. Image has no information to deliver.

- decorative icons
- decorative images

> > - Leave the `alt` value blank.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> - Provide an empty `alt` value.
```
